README.md, before:

# DiscreteSamplingFramework
Python classes describing discrete variable sampling/proposals/targets

## Requirements
 - Python 3.x
 - numpy
 - scipy
 - scikit-learn (for examples)
 - [bridgestan](https://github.com/roualdes/bridgestan) (for models with continuous parameters specified with Stan)
 - cmdstanpy (for models with continuous parameters specified with Stan)

## Continuous Parameters and Stan 
For models with continuous parameters, the continuous model conditional on discrete
parameters can be specified using a model written in Stan.
Log density and gradient information are extracted from Stan models using
[bridgestan](https://github.com/roualdes/bridgestan).



## Installation

Install with pip:
```bash
pip install pip install git+https://github.com/DiscreteVariablesTaskForce/DiscreteSamplingFramework.git
```

or

```
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/DiscreteVariablesTaskForce/DiscreteSamplingFramework.git
pip install -e DiscreteSamplingFramework
```

### bridgestan

[bridgestan](https://github.com/roualdes/bridgestan) must be "installed".
It is set as a submodule of this repo and so, if you installed by cloning the repo, you can
set an environment variable to point to the bridgestan repo:
```bash
export BRIDGESTAN=<path/to/this/repo/>/bridgestan
```


Alternatively, you can clone bridgestan elsewhere and set an environment variable:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/roualdes/bridgestan.git <path/to/bridgestan>
export BRIDGESTAN=<path/to/bridgestan>
```

If this environment variable is not set, discretesampling will attempt to set it to
the bridgestan submodule.


### Cmdstan
[cmdstan](https://github.com/stan-dev/cmdstan) is also required to query stan models with bridgestan.

#### Installation with cmdstanpy
The simplest way to install cmdstan is using cmdstanpy:
```python
import cmdstanpy
cmdstanpy.install_cmdstan()
```
which will download and build the latest version of cmdstan to
your home directory in `~/.cmdstan` and
sets an environment variable `CMDSTAN` to that location.

#### Manual installation
Alternatively, cmdstan can be installed manually following instructions for [installing with conda](https://mc-stan.org/docs/cmdstan-guide/cmdstan-installation.html#conda-install) or [building from source](https://mc-stan.org/docs/cmdstan-guide/cmdstan-installation.html#installation-from-github).

The `CMDSTAN` environment variable should be then set:
```bash
export CMDSTAN=path/to/cmdstan
```
or with cmdstanpy:
```python
import cmdstanpy
cmdstanpy.set_cmdstan_path('path/to/cmdstan')
```



## Variables and Distributions
### Discrete Variables
Each example of these should, at minimum implement functions:
 - `__init__` - a constructor with some arguments setting up the basic attributes of the variable
 - `getProposalType` - a class method returning the relevant proposal distribution type for this variable type
 - `getInitialProposalType` - a class method returning the relevant initial proposal distribution type for this variable type
- `getTargetType` - a class method returning the relevant target distribution type for this variable type

We may at some point in the future need to also include:
 - `getLKernelType` - a class method returning the relevant LKernel distribution type for this variable type
 - `getOptimalLKernelType` - a class method returning the relevant Optimal LKernel distribution type for this variable type (a special case of the above probably)
 
 as well as implementing these distribution classes for each variable type.


### Discrete Variable Proposal Distributions
Proposal distributions, q(x'|x), for each variable type should be described.
Each example of these should, at minimum implement functions:
 - `__init__` - constructor with a single argument (a DiscreteVariable, x) which will act as the "starting point" for this proposal
 - `eval` - function taking a single argument (a DiscreteVariable, x') that returns the log-probability of sampling that DiscreteVariable from this proposal (P(x|x'))
 - `sample` - function with no arguments which returns a sample of a DiscreteVariable, x', from this proposal, q (x' ~ q(x))

For more efficient evaluation, optionally implement class methods:
 - `norm` - function that takes a single additional argument (a DiscreteVariable x) and returns some position-like value for that proposal/variable type. This value should impose some sort of ordering on DiscreteVariables.
 - `heuristic` - function that takes two arguments, which will be returns from the above `norm` function and, given
 these values, either return true if the proposal could potentially make transitions between two DiscreteVariables with these norm values or otherwise return false. Note that `heuristic(norm(x), norm(y)) == true` need not guarantee that the transition probability between x and y is non-zero. The inverse is however true: `heuristic(norm(x), norm(y)) == false` guarantees that the transition probability between x and y is zero.

 These two functions will allows for efficient culling of proposal evaluations when implementing e.g. optimal L-kernels


### Discrete Variable Initial Proposal Distributions
Similarly, distributions of initial proposals. q0(x) should be described.
Each example of these should, at minimum implement functions:
 - `__init__` - constructor, possibly with some extra parameters
 - `eval` - function taking a single argument (a DiscreteVariable, x) that returns the log-probability of sampling that DiscreteVariable from this proposal (q0(x))
 - `sample` - function with no arguments which returns a sample of a DiscreteVariable, x', from this initial proposal (x ~ q0())

### Discrete Variable Target Distributions
Each example of these should, at minimum implement functions:
 - `__init__` - constructor, possibly with some parameters theta and data D
 - `eval` - function taking a single argument (a DiscreteVariable, x) that returns the log-posterior density logP(D|x,theta) + logP(x|theta)

## Algorithms

MCMC and SMC samplers for discrete variables are implemented. Working examples for the implemented variable types can be found in the `examples` directory.

### MCMC sampler
Basic MCMC sampler which can be initialised with a variable type, target distribution and initial proposal (initial samples are drawn from this). Samples can then be drawn with the `.sample` function, which takes one argument, `N`, the number of iterations. An example using the decision tree variable type is shown below:

```python
from discretesampling import decision_tree as dt
from discretesampling.algorithms import DiscreteVariableMCMC
from sklearn import datasets
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
import numpy as np

data = datasets.load_wine()
X = data.data
y = data.target
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X,y,test_size = 0.30,random_state=5)

a = 0.01
b = 5
target = dt.TreeTarget(a,b)
initialProposal = dt.TreeInitialProposal(X_train, y_train)

mcmcSampler = DiscreteVariableMCMC(dt.Tree, target, initialProposal)
samples = mcmcSampler.sample(N = 5000)
```

### SMC sampler
Similary, a basic SMC sampler which can be initialised with a variable type, target distribution and initial proposal (initial samples are drawn from this and weights calculated appropriately). Samples can then be drawn with the `sample` function, which takes two arguments, `N` and `P` the number of iterations and number of particles. An example using the decision tree variable type is shown below:

```python
from discretesampling import decision_tree as dt
from discretesampling.algorithms import DiscreteVariableSMC
from sklearn import datasets
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
import numpy as np

data = datasets.load_wine()
X = data.data
y = data.target
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X,y,test_size = 0.30,random_state=5)

a = 0.01
b = 5
target = dt.TreeTarget(a,b)
initialProposal = dt.TreeInitialProposal(X_train, y_train)

smcSampler = DiscreteVariableSMC(dt.Tree, target, initialProposal)
samples = smcSampler.sample(N=10,P=1000)
```

Commit message:

Updated examples and minor fixes
- Updated the continuous proposal in rjmcmc_example.py to the new
  format.
- Tweaked the sonar examples so that they don't take as long during
  tests.
- Included the option to specify warmup in the RJMCMC algorithm.
- Fixed issue with random walk sampler when used in SMC.
- Added a note in the README warning about a potential issue with
  bridgestan on Windows.

README.md, after:

# DiscreteSamplingFramework
Python classes describing discrete variable sampling/proposals/targets

## Requirements
 - Python 3.x
 - numpy
 - scipy
 - scikit-learn (for examples)
 - [bridgestan](https://github.com/roualdes/bridgestan) (for models with continuous parameters specified with Stan)
 - cmdstanpy (for models with continuous parameters specified with Stan)

## Continuous Parameters and Stan 
For models with continuous parameters, the continuous model conditional on discrete
parameters can be specified using a model written in Stan.
Log density and gradient information are extracted from Stan models using
[bridgestan](https://github.com/roualdes/bridgestan).



## Installation

Install with pip:
```bash
pip install pip install git+https://github.com/DiscreteVariablesTaskForce/DiscreteSamplingFramework.git
```

or

```
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/DiscreteVariablesTaskForce/DiscreteSamplingFramework.git
pip install -e DiscreteSamplingFramework
```

### bridgestan

[bridgestan](https://github.com/roualdes/bridgestan) must be "installed".
It is set as a submodule of this repo and so, if you installed by cloning the repo, you can
set an environment variable to point to the bridgestan repo:
```bash
export BRIDGESTAN=<path/to/this/repo/>/bridgestan
```


Alternatively, you can clone bridgestan elsewhere and set an environment variable:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/roualdes/bridgestan.git <path/to/bridgestan>
export BRIDGESTAN=<path/to/bridgestan>
```

If this environment variable is not set, discretesampling will attempt to set it to
the bridgestan submodule.


### Cmdstan
[cmdstan](https://github.com/stan-dev/cmdstan) is also required to query stan models with bridgestan.

#### Installation with cmdstanpy
The simplest way to install cmdstan is using cmdstanpy:
```python
import cmdstanpy
cmdstanpy.install_cmdstan()
```
which will download and build the latest version of cmdstan to
your home directory in `~/.cmdstan` and
sets an environment variable `CMDSTAN` to that location.

#### Manual installation
Alternatively, cmdstan can be installed manually following instructions for [installing with conda](https://mc-stan.org/docs/cmdstan-guide/cmdstan-installation.html#conda-install) or [building from source](https://mc-stan.org/docs/cmdstan-guide/cmdstan-installation.html#installation-from-github).

The `CMDSTAN` environment variable should be then set:
```bash
export CMDSTAN=path/to/cmdstan
```
or with cmdstanpy:
```python
import cmdstanpy
cmdstanpy.set_cmdstan_path('path/to/cmdstan')
```

#### Windows
On Windows there's an additional step in the cmdstan installation to link the TBB libraries. However, this might not work correctly. In this case you may run into an error when using bridgestan, where it will say that it is unable to find the model .so file or one of its dependencies. The way to fix this is to copy the tbb.dll file from `cmdstan\stan\lib\stan_math\lib\tbb` to the folder containing the stan model.


## Variables and Distributions
### Discrete Variables
Each example of these should, at minimum implement functions:
 - `__init__` - a constructor with some arguments setting up the basic attributes of the variable
 - `getProposalType` - a class method returning the relevant proposal distribution type for this variable type
 - `getInitialProposalType` - a class method returning the relevant initial proposal distribution type for this variable type
- `getTargetType` - a class method returning the relevant target distribution type for this variable type

We may at some point in the future need to also include:
 - `getLKernelType` - a class method returning the relevant LKernel distribution type for this variable type
 - `getOptimalLKernelType` - a class method returning the relevant Optimal LKernel distribution type for this variable type (a special case of the above probably)
 
 as well as implementing these distribution classes for each variable type.


### Discrete Variable Proposal Distributions
Proposal distributions, q(x'|x), for each variable type should be described.
Each example of these should, at minimum implement functions:
 - `__init__` - constructor with a single argument (a DiscreteVariable, x) which will act as the "starting point" for this proposal
 - `eval` - function taking a single argument (a DiscreteVariable, x') that returns the log-probability of sampling that DiscreteVariable from this proposal (P(x|x'))
 - `sample` - function with no arguments which returns a sample of a DiscreteVariable, x', from this proposal, q (x' ~ q(x))

For more efficient evaluation, optionally implement class methods:
 - `norm` - function that takes a single additional argument (a DiscreteVariable x) and returns some position-like value for that proposal/variable type. This value should impose some sort of ordering on DiscreteVariables.
 - `heuristic` - function that takes two arguments, which will be returns from the above `norm` function and, given
 these values, either return true if the proposal could potentially make transitions between two DiscreteVariables with these norm values or otherwise return false. Note that `heuristic(norm(x), norm(y)) == true` need not guarantee that the transition probability between x and y is non-zero. The inverse is however true: `heuristic(norm(x), norm(y)) == false` guarantees that the transition probability between x and y is zero.

 These two functions will allows for efficient culling of proposal evaluations when implementing e.g. optimal L-kernels


### Discrete Variable Initial Proposal Distributions
Similarly, distributions of initial proposals. q0(x) should be described.
Each example of these should, at minimum implement functions:
 - `__init__` - constructor, possibly with some extra parameters
 - `eval` - function taking a single argument (a DiscreteVariable, x) that returns the log-probability of sampling that DiscreteVariable from this proposal (q0(x))
 - `sample` - function with no arguments which returns a sample of a DiscreteVariable, x', from this initial proposal (x ~ q0())

### Discrete Variable Target Distributions
Each example of these should, at minimum implement functions:
 - `__init__` - constructor, possibly with some parameters theta and data D
 - `eval` - function taking a single argument (a DiscreteVariable, x) that returns the log-posterior density logP(D|x,theta) + logP(x|theta)

## Algorithms

MCMC and SMC samplers for discrete variables are implemented. Working examples for the implemented variable types can be found in the `examples` directory.

### MCMC sampler
Basic MCMC sampler which can be initialised with a variable type, target distribution and initial proposal (initial samples are drawn from this). Samples can then be drawn with the `.sample` function, which takes one argument, `N`, the number of iterations. An example using the decision tree variable type is shown below:

```python
from discretesampling import decision_tree as dt
from discretesampling.algorithms import DiscreteVariableMCMC
from sklearn import datasets
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
import numpy as np

data = datasets.load_wine()
X = data.data
y = data.target
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X,y,test_size = 0.30,random_state=5)

a = 0.01
b = 5
target = dt.TreeTarget(a,b)
initialProposal = dt.TreeInitialProposal(X_train, y_train)

mcmcSampler = DiscreteVariableMCMC(dt.Tree, target, initialProposal)
samples = mcmcSampler.sample(N = 5000)
```

### SMC sampler
Similary, a basic SMC sampler which can be initialised with a variable type, target distribution and initial proposal (initial samples are drawn from this and weights calculated appropriately). Samples can then be drawn with the `sample` function, which takes two arguments, `N` and `P` the number of iterations and number of particles. An example using the decision tree variable type is shown below:

```python
from discretesampling import decision_tree as dt
from discretesampling.algorithms import DiscreteVariableSMC
from sklearn import datasets
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
import numpy as np

data = datasets.load_wine()
X = data.data
y = data.target
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X,y,test_size = 0.30,random_state=5)

a = 0.01
b = 5
target = dt.TreeTarget(a,b)
initialProposal = dt.TreeInitialProposal(X_train, y_train)

smcSampler = DiscreteVariableSMC(dt.Tree, target, initialProposal)
samples = smcSampler.sample(N=10,P=1000)
```
